What Is Linux :
Linux Is A Open Source Operating System Module On Unix And Devloped In 'C'lang Open Source : 
Open source 
•	A Software Become Source If Its Is Source Code Freely Available. 
	
•	The Free Software Moment Was Started In 1983 And 1998 Some Developers Code The Term Open Source To Make It Less And Ambiguous And Every One A Adapted To It.

•	Open source Project Are Generally A Collaboration Effort By Multiple Sets Of Developers To Enhance The Product And Allow Others To Get Benefit Of It .

History Of Linux Linux Vs Unix Feacture Of Lunix:Open Source ,Monitry Cost,Huge Base,Reliable ,Licensing Freedom,Custmized,Secure .

Where Linux Is Used:Servers,Supercpmputers,Gaming And Visual Effects ,Embedded System,Andriod,Nasa 


Compents Of Linuxos:1)Init Programe-------,>Boot Loader------>>, Software Libraries(DLL)----------->,Package Managment-------->,Other Interface And Application

Init program:The first program which is respoible for the itilztion of th system ex:sysvinit,systemd 


Boot loader: a program which loads the operating system 

(Architecure Of Linux OS ): Application----->Shell-------->Kernel---------->Hardware(Architecure Of Linux OS )
Shell:The shell is the interface which takes user -command ans sendsit to the kernel

APPLICTION --->SHELL--->Kern---->HARD WARE

The kneral is the interface between the application and the actual process done ate the Hardware level . 

Tasks peformend by the kernel 1)resources Allocation :-Manage he computers resources and allow other programs to run and use these resources ,

2)security Managment: provided the security and protection from faults and maliicious behaviours, 
process management: allows the execution of application and suport tem with feacturesuch as hardware abstraction.
device management:maintains a list of available devicesand allow drives to physically acess their devices .
scheduling:gives every program specific amount of thime and can stwic from one process to another . 
Memory Managment: Allows process to safty aess the memory according to their requriments. 
SHELL:The shell is the IINTERFACE which takes USERCOMMAND and sends It to the KERNEL.
she has got its own programmng languae and yo can combine mulitiple commands in asingle script
,The shell taked the commands in human readable fromant and provides its to Kernel in bnary language.
The user generally intracts via shell ,but direct interction with hardware is also possible,
the first shell created was Sh for Unix system ,Linux still provide support for Sh shell, but Bash is more popular with in the Linux users . 
APPLICATION------SHELL------KERNEL-----HARDWARE(DEVICE, CPU,MEMORY) How Shell Works?:
-The command to be Executed or shell script ------Linux shell---------Converted to binary lang by 
Shell -----sent to Linux Kernel example :grep,awk,cat------BASH------10110000,10001100,00110011----------Linux Kernel . 
TYPES OF SHELL;-Shell --------BASH--CSHELL----KORNSHELL-------TSCHSHELl
1)bourne-again shell was written as partof the GNUprojevt to enchancethe funcionally of asha (bourie-sheel)some enchancmnt likes command complicationcommand history are done
command:--Deskops $echo shell

one can enter "#/bin/bash" at the topof the file to tell linux to run with bash interpeter.

commands :

Linux provides a CLI (Command Line Interface) to communicate with the OS. Here are the most basic of the Linux Commands.

1. pwd (print working diretory )-starring from the root 
1)pwd -L-symobalic path 
2)pwd-P-prints the actual path 
Displays the current working directory of the terminal.

syntax:

$ pwd

$ pwd
/home/sudha 

echo command is used for the  displaying lines of text or string which are passed as arguments on the command line. 
This is one of the basic command in linux and most commonly used in shell scripts. In this tutorial, we will look at the different options of echo command.

Writes its arguments to standard output.

syntax:

$ echo "<text>"

clear

$ clear


BASIC CLI COMMANDS :

/Desktops$ echo "sudha"
sudha
/desktops$ echo $SHELL
bin/bash
desktops cat /etc/shells
/etc/shells:valid login shells
bin/sh
/bin/dash
bin/bash
/bin/rbash

HOW TO CHOOSE DISTRO
the distro should be chosen based on the requriment of the user ,pursose of the use-prosenol or professional,easy to install,look and fell .for the tranning its is recomamend to use ubuntu .

Ubuntu :most populor linux distro
secure and reliable
muliti variant realse
easy to use 


file:-- 
You dont  need a command to check the  CPU  info.but can print yje file."/proc/cpuinfo/" 
there are some special files that reprsent hardware devices, system information .etc,The /proc file system in Linux gives details about the Kernels run time operation in form of plain text fies.

basic commands :

mkdir:make directories is used to make a new directory under any directory 

$mkdir new -dir 

rmdir:its is used to delete a directory 
$rmdir new-dir/
ls
ls command
ls command is used display a list of conent of a directory 
$ls

cd command is used for change the current directory 

file command :

touch command is used for create new ile one or more files.
$touch 

cat command : is used for the 

cat


This command can read, modify or concatenate text files. It also displays file contents.


syntax:

$ cat <flag> {filename}

Command

Description
cat -b

This adds line numbers to non-blank lines

cat -n

This adds line numbers to all lines

cat -s

This squeezes blank lines into one line

cat –E

This shows $ at the end of line


Run Level in Linux 
0---Halt the system ,1--single user mode
2--mulitiple user mode with no network file system
3 -- mulipiple  user mode CLIBUT NO Gui
4--user definable
5.multiple use mode in GIU
6.reboot

PIPE:

pipe represened as "|" is used to direct the output of ine commsnd to another .it create an onternal connecion between or more commands,pipe galong most wirp grep is mos vommonly ued 
ex:- catfil.txt/grep"linux"

shell scripting : isa series of shell commands arrnged in atext file to be extued one faherafter he other .
.simmallar to batch filr in windows
helps to automate sequence of creating and also save time.
can be created using any normal text editor


command Vi
Vi command is used for most editig file 


creating a shell script:
to get into the root for execution Sudo-i ceate a text file and add the extenstion of te shell #vi scripit.sh------>Enter some commands in the scripts tobe executed eho"My firstscript" echo$(date)------>change the permission of the script , give it executable permission and may also give read and execute permission for the othr users #chmond 755 script .sh---------->Run the sript  #/script.sh #bash script.sh  

creating a shell script

sub-i
 #vi scripit.sh
 

echo"my first Script" echo$(date)

#chmod 755 script.sh

#/script.sh #bash script.sh

Practical uses of shell scripting 
1)Data backup at regular iterval of time in the background

2)tofid out the number of user and theier details

3)find details about various process and sorting hem based on CPU usage ,run time,

4)to append each file with a signature , date etc.

5)for schedulling tasks to be done at networking severs

6)creating new users by providing permission just by entering username .


USER INTERFACE IN LINUX

user iterface is avisual part of Operating system through which a user interacts with a computer or a software

COMMAND LINE INTERFACE (CLI)

command line interfae give commands in the form of linesof text to the program .the program which handles it is called a command language interpreter.

Usr interface in Linux
graphical user interface with users with icons,floder , wallpapers,widgets and visual indicators to makes it easier for the user to access the program.
CLI--------->graphical user iterface(GUI)  mate,k,Gnome,CINNAMON

Command execution:
1)one needs terminial (CLI) to execute the command 
2)Multiple commands can be executed sequentally by addin "," in between them .

Syntax:
Command <option><arguments>

all commands:
1)creating diretory with given name:mkdir

list the content of directory :ls

to see root directory:ls /

to see only text file:ls*txt

to see flodername before :ls ..
to see two floders before:ls../..

list the content of a current directory :ls-l
list out normal and hidden files:ls-a
to see only the directories:ls -d*/

ls-a fcommand is used will list out all filles including hidden files.

ls -r -R command in Linux
ls -r option flag lists files/directories in reverse order.

ls -R option flag lists directory tree recursively.

mv command 

Move Single File or Directory from One Directory to Anothe

$ mv directory1 directory2

Move Multiple File or Directories from One Directory to Another

$ mv file1 file2 file3 dir1








